v1.6: Vector search v2 (#2666)
meilisearch/documentation: learn/experimental/vector_search.mdx

  }'
```

### Generate vector embeddings

To use vector search, first configure the `embedders` index setting. You may configure multiple embedders for an index. 

Embedders generate vector data from your documents. Meilisearch natively supports [OpenAI](https://openai.com/) and [HuggingFace](https://huggingface.co/) embedders. 

It is also possible to use custom embedders. In this case, you must generate the embeddings manually and add include them as a field in your documents.

#### Generate auto-embeddings with OpenAI 

Use the `embedders` index setting of the [update `/settings` endpoint](/reference/api/settings) to configure one or more embedders for an index:

```sh
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "embedders": {
      "default": {
        "source":  "openAI",

>         "apiKey": "anOpenAiApiKey",

Reviewer: I think we should specify how to procure a key + specify that for good indexing performance it is recommended to use a key of tier 2 or above

Author: Definitely yes on the tier 2 bit. I'll try to give slightly more directions on procuring the API key, but I really don't want to get into documenting openAI directly.

        "model": "text-embedding-ada-002",
        "documentTemplate": "A movie titled '{{doc.title}}' whose description starts with {{doc.overview|truncatewords: 20}}"
      }
    }
  }'
```

`documentTemplate` is an optional field you can use to send only relevant data to the model. `documentTemplate` must be a [Liquid template](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/).

#### Generate auto-embeddings with HuggingFace 

Use the `embedders` index setting of the [update `/settings` endpoint](/reference/api/settings) to configure one or more embedders for an index:

```sh
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "embedders": {
      "default": {
        "source":  "huggingFace",
        "model": "bge-base-en-v1.5",
        "documentTemplate": "A movie titled '{{doc.title}}' whose description starts with {{doc.overview|truncatewords: 20}}"
      }
    }
  }'
```

> `documentTemplate` is an optional field you can use to send only relevant data to the model. `documentTemplate` must be a [Liquid template](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/).

Reviewer: I think we need more information about the `documentTemplate` in a dedicated section, otherwise I don't think users will be able to use it.

Missing information:

1. The document template is like a text with blanks that are filled by the fields of each document during the indexing process, and serve as the view of the document that will be used for computing the embedding.
2. The document template should be written such that the template filled by documents produces a short text that is highly semantically relevant. In particular:
    1. Information applicable to any document of the index can be added: "a movie", "a book", "a product"
    2. Information from fields that are not semantic (id, release date) can be left out
    3. Fields that can get very long should be truncated after some number of [characters](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/filters/truncate/) or of [words](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/filters/truncatewords/)
3. Although a default template is provided, it is highly recommended to customize the template to suit your document, because the default template contains all the fields untruncated, and so will typically produce texts that are too long and not relevant enough.
4. Meilisearch exposes two bits of context to the template:
    1. For each field `attribute` in the document, `{{ doc.attribute }}` will resolve to the value of that field in the document. ⚠️ If an `attribute` field referenced in the template is undefined for a document, then an indexing error will be raised (it is OK to have the field be `null` though, it will result in a [`nil`](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/basics/types/#nil) value)
    2. The special `{{ fields }}` variable is an [array](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/basics/types/#array) that contain one `field` element per field appearing in a document from the dataset. Each `field` element has two subfields:
    - `{{ field.name }}`: name of that field (e.g. `text`)
    - `{{ field.value }}`: value of that field (e.g. `frying pan`), or [`nil`](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/basics/types/#nil) if the field is undefined or `null` for that document.

Author: This document is supposed to be more of a quick start with vector search than an exhaustive reference. Going into too much detail will make it lose focus as it tries to do too many things at once (advertise the feature, guide new users, serve as a reference for advanced users).

I will integrate some of what you say into this document because users won't have anywhere else to refer to (perhaps the GH discussion, if it's still being updated regularly), but I will probably only add everything to a separate document.

It's clear our current approach to experimental features is breaking down, which is something I plan to address very soon.

Reviewer: > This document is supposed to be more of a quick start with vector search than an exhaustive reference. 

In general, I agree. Still I think using a custom template is crucial to correctly using the feature (I'm starting to regret having included a default template rather than force users to pass a template)

  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "embedders": {
      "default": {
        "source":  "userProvided",
        "dimensions": 3
      }
    }
  }'
```

Then, use [the `/documents` endpoint](/reference/api/documents) to upload vectorized documents. Store vector data in your documents' `_vector` field:

```sh
curl -X POST -H 'content-type: application/json' \
'localhost:7700/indexes/products/documents' \
--data-binary '[
    { "id": 0, "_vectors": {"image2text": [0, 0.8, -0.2]}, "text": "frying pan" },
    { "id": 1, "_vectors": {"image2text": [1, -0.2, 0]}, "text": "baking dish" }
]'
```

### Vector search with auto-embeddings

Perform searches with `q` and `hybrid` to retrieve search results using both keyword and semantic search:

```sh
curl -X POST -H 'content-type: application/json' \
  'localhost:7700/indexes/products/search' \
  --data-binary '{ 
    "q": "kitchen utensils",
    "hybrid": {
      "semanticRatio": 0.9,
      "embedder": "default"
    }
  }'
```

`hybrid` is an object and accepts two fields:
- `semanticRatio`: number between `0` and `1`. `0` indicates full keyword search, `1` indicates full semantic search. Defaults to `0.5`

> - `embedder`: string, indicating one of the embedders configured for the queried index. Defaults to `"default"`

Author: Yeap, it's definitely a choice. As I mention in another comment, this document is supposed to be more of a tutorial than an exhaustive reference, so I'm trying to only include information that is absolutely crucial to use the feature.

      }
    }
  }'
```

It is mandatory to pass an OpenAI API key through the `OPENAI_API_KEY` environment variable or the `apiKey` field when using an OpenAI embedder. [Generate an API key](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys) from your OpenAI account. Use [tier 2 keys](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate-limits/usage-tiers?context=tier-two) or above for optimal performance.

`documentTemplate` is an optional field you can use to customize the data you send to the embedder. It is highly recommended you configure a custom template for your documents.

<Capsule intent="tip" title="`documentTemplate` usage">
`documentTemplate` must be a [Liquid template](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/). Use `{{ doc.attribute }}` to access the `attribute` field value of your documents. Any field you refer to in this way must exist in all documents or an error will be raised at indexing time.

For best results, use short strings indicating the type of document in that index, only include highly relevant document fields, and truncate long fields.  
</Capsule>

#### Generate auto-embeddings with HuggingFace 

> The HuggingFace computes embeddings locally. This is a resource-intensive operation and might affect indexing performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HuggingFace computes embeddings locally. This is a resource-intensive operation and might affect indexing performance.
```

Reviewer 2: Alternatively "The HuggingFace embedder computes"?

Author: Yeap, thanks for spotting it. I did mean to write "The HuggingFace embedder" 😅

For best results, use short strings indicating the type of document in that index, only include highly relevant document fields, and truncate long fields.  
</Capsule>

#### Custom embeddings

You may also provide custom embeddings. In this case, you must manually update your embeddings when adding, updating, and removing documents to your index.

Configure the `embedder` index setting:

```sh
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "embedders": {
      "image2text": {
        "source":  "userProvided",
        "dimensions": 3
      }
    }
  }'
```

Then, use [the `/documents` endpoint](/reference/api/documents) to upload vectorized documents. Store vector data in your documents' `_vectors` field:

```sh
curl -X POST -H 'content-type: application/json' \
'localhost:7700/indexes/products/documents' \
--data-binary '[
    { "id": 0, "_vectors": {"image2text": [0, 0.8, -0.2]}, "text": "frying pan" },
    { "id": 1, "_vectors": {"image2text": [1, -0.2, 0]}, "text": "baking dish" }
]'
```

> ### Vector search with auto-embeddings

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Hybrid search with auto-embeddings
```

Author: For the moment, while our communication strategy for this hasn't been completely decided by the marketing team, I will keep vector search so it's consistent with the rest of this document. Once we have clarity on terminology choices and etc, I'll update this article to reflect that.

  }'
```

> `apiKey` is a mandatory field when using an OpenAI embedder. [Generate an API key](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys) from your OpenAI account. Use [tier 2 keys](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate-limits/usage-tiers?context=tier-two) for optimal performance.

Reviewer: Thank you for adding the requested information. A detail, `apiKey` is not mandatory in that we take the key from the environment if it wasn't specified. I think it is important to specify because it could be surprising to users that we use this env variable.

```suggestion
It is mandatory to pass an OpenAI API key through the `OPENAI_API_KEY` environment variable or the `apiKey` field when using an OpenAI embedder. [Generate an API key](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys) from your OpenAI account. Use [tier 2 keys](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate-limits/usage-tiers?context=tier-two) or above for optimal performance.
```

`documentTemplate` is an optional field you can use to customize the data you send to the embedder. It is highly recommended you configure a custom template for your documents.

<Capsule intent="tip" title="`documentTemplate` usage">

> `documentTemplate` must be a [Liquid template](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/). Use `{{ doc.attribute }}` to access document field values. Meilisearch also exposes a `{{ fields }}` array containing one object per document field, which you may access with `{{ field.name }}` and `{{ field.value }}`.

Reviewer: Thank you very much for the addition, but I feel we really should specify the behavior if a document doesn't contain an attribute referenced in the template.

If you need to shorten the text, then let's give up on the more niche `fields`.

```suggestion
`documentTemplate` must be a [Liquid template](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/). Use `{{ doc.attribute }}` to access the `attribute` field value of your documents. Any field you refer to in this way must exist in all documents or an error will be raised at indexing time.
```
